== <tt>Heading text</tt> ==
 Eye of God in human history's (Fangruida artcles)
#REDIRECT [[[http://www.academia.edu/9604713/FangRuida_science_research www.academia.edu/9604713/FangRuida_science_research]]]

independent.academia.edu/TszMarlon[http://independent.academia.edu/TszMarlon independent.academia.edu/TszMarlon]
greatest pioneering history of the world's most brilliant picture, the natural splendor of the universe's greatest landscape ----- 30 most significant scientific universe's most cutting-edge technology research and development project (/ Heavy News No. // outside)
------------------------------- No big news outside / Heavy news
----- Eye of God in human history's greatest pioneering history of the world's most brilliant picture, the natural splendor of the universe's greatest landscape ----- 30 most significant scientific universe's most cutting-edge technology research and development projects // No big news outside / Heavy news
	





Space Science 30 major cutting-edge technology research and breakthroughs, the commercial value of hundreds of trillions and huge profits

     21-22 century science and technology advances, brewing a major breakthrough in all areas. In the field of cutting-edge technology, aerospace engineering to bear the brunt, most important, led the way, an extremely important area for future development of human society. In a sense, it will completely change the rewrite human history and natural history of the universe. Particularly with regard to Mars landing, establishing a lunar base, the Moon of Earth, Mars, the planet of the countries in the world put a lot of manpower, material and financial resources to develop the breakthrough Figure in cosmic science. Mars landing probably need to invest billions of dollars to, or less, if the budget billions of dollars can also be piloted. Simple lunar base only about several hundred billion dollars to the initial shape. The large-scale transformation of the moon, Mars transform costly, it can not be said to astronomical, but it also needs tens of trillions of dollars. Save some estimates, at least invest between $ trillions and tens of trillions of dollars. Of course, technically feasible, the return naturally considerable, about investment profits worth hundreds of times, this is self-evident. Water temperature, air is the most important prerequisite for the existence of life. Planet trillions of kilometers away, rather than the Earth, very, difficult to imagine in the north and south. The most critical scientific research is Earth, the Moon, Mars or other planets countless whether absolute 'homogeneity', or 'heterogeneity', which is the major issue of great concern to scientists.



Space science and technology major cutting-edge technology are many, but the most important to solve the most urgent of the most critical include the following 30 top cutting-edge technology. The following are described as follows: "design, drawings, patents, know-how, formulas, processes, materials, etc.). Aerospace science and technology, space technology high investment, high risk, therefore, very important systems integration technology, safe, reliable and feasible, low-cost, otherwise, even the best technical drawings also will become a dead letter, shelved, it is the success of R & D The key lies. Thus, R & D 30 cutting-edge technology can be streamlined to save, for example, simulation, simulation, simulation design, simulation, design, and so on, with high high high intelligence capability means a significant reduction in a variety of research costs. For example, the spacecraft design, spacecraft dynamic design, automatic control, new materials, Mars geology, etc., greatly reducing the development costs.


Mainly to solve the major cutting-edge technology, including (1) the planet water synthesis. Regardless of the moon or Mars, water is undoubtedly the source of life. Overcome difficulties water is primary sophisticated high-end technology. Water Planet manufacture of synthetic technology. As long as this technology breakthrough, it means that the human world greatest success. Of course, there are in-depth exploration and mining of groundwater resources of the planet, there may be possibilities. (2) Preparation of air oxygen composite technology. This is not very difficult. (3) temperature, energy technologies. This technique has difficulty factor, but not very obvious. (4). Speeding spaceship energy technology. The new spacecraft. (5). A full life support systems technology. (6). Biosystems survival techniques. (7). Cosmic radiation radiation technology and specialty materials. Special space suits. This technique also requires breakthroughs. (7) Space instant messaging technology. (8) Super energy accumulator technology / space solar energy machine technology. (9). Universe mineral mining technology. (10) Air, water, energy recycling technology. Recycling technology. (11). Living Planet warehouse full set of technology, security technology; universe warehouse full technical work; universe outside warehouse full set of technology and other sports activities. (12) moon base, Mars base life support backup system. Moon base, Mars base complete set working system. System is divided into A, B, C multi-class "A system >>, << B system." >> << C systems, as well as spacecraft safety emergency system, automatic emergency system, the spacecraft, the astronaut rescue system, automatic escape system and so on. (13) Space Biomedical, human health care system. Universe biomedical technology, especially under extreme conditions of human survival health technologies. Universe Planet emergency medical drugs medical equipment systems. Under (14) in extreme environments, extreme changes in the minimum guarantees under life and maintain the system. (Fifteen). Planet food manufacturing and regeneration system. (16). Cosmic super telescope, the moon or Mars, the solar cosmic prism. (17) Mars moon automatic engineering vehicles, aircraft Planet (18) Ultra features high capacity shuttle cargo spacecraft (19) Space technology Geological acquisition system (20). Super computer technology, special high-performance large-scale computer and its system software used in the art universe, applications, etc. (21). Universe relay transmission technology. Planet universe interstellar advanced communication technology (22). Spaceship stars technology universe automatic return (1,2 backup system, the spacecraft landed on Mars and Mars spacecraft automatically return technology), the spacecraft automatically return midway technology. (Matching) (23). Large construction vehicles lunar / Mars large construction vehicles. (twenty four). Moon buggy / Mars buggy. Distance long distance movement. (25) planet survive unforeseen technical (reserve system). (26) Space science experimental techniques. (27) the planet human life necessary processing technology and other related technology integration. (28) the planet long lived and extend the system, the extension system, soil cultivation technology and other planets. (29) Planet intelligent robot operating system. (30) Planet person spiritual and cultural life support systems. Universe and numerous other top technology integration sophisticated convergence, and so on. Regardless of the Moon, or Mars, they are inseparable from these high precision and advanced technology. Including drawings, designs, patents, industrial testing and other aspects. Mars alone or set up a small base on the moon, you can Shanfanjiujian not need all, choosing the few on it. Sophistication, practicality, feasibility, reliability, economy, one of five, reliability, economy and try. However, due to apply technology beyond the Earth, often subject to the limitations of the Earth developed, therefore, need to develop redundancy design, technical margin maximum advisable to prepare for any eventuality and the risk of accidents.
    30 great tip top space science and technology, the commercial value of $ 20 trillion directly. Development costs 3-10 trillion, design fees 1000-5000 billion, technology transfer fee of US $ 30-50 trillion (International Patent Application), economic value and technology of inestimable scientific value is estimated at 7000000000000000 dollars or more. Short-term benefits are directly on top of hundreds of billions of dollars. "The main technical drawing class technology for the patented formula diagram, according to the World international patent drawings, multi-language, in English format, machinery except electrical and electronic maps detail. Transfer only patented formula class drawings. Technical trading fee separately trader di fixed. "As described above, the establishment of a lunar base or direct to Mars, the human from the present technical and economic investment has been basically feasible, is not elusive thing. Just a matter of time. The transformation of Mars, the moon or other planets transformation is not something foreseeable future. Only need to maturity of the related art and other prerequisites. Space technology has developed rapidly, it has many features, (1), space technology is highly integrated modern science and technology, it is the integration of many of the latest achievements of science and technology, including jet technology, electronics technology, automation technology, remote sensing technology, materials science , computer science, mathematics, physics, chemistry and so on. (2), space technology is the country's modernization and social progress of science and technology has a macro effect. Since the spacecraft speed, operating altitude is high, it is possible to quickly cover a wide range of Earth's surface. For example, by making satellite TV network covering the whole country until global; meteorological satellites can be global weather forecasts, including long-term weather forecasting; reconnaissance satellites can detect military activities in various regions of the world and so on. That many of which are conventional means can not be done. (3) is a high input, high efficiency, high-risk business. (4) space technology, also known as the Aerospace Science and Technology, various high-tech enrichment, 21-22 century, human society is the greatest practice space, is a concentrated expression of the country's most powerful. He is different from nuclear weapons, aircraft and the like, are mainly used for peaceful purposes (of course, also contain a component of military strategy exists). Strictly speaking, aerospace technology actually is a "Living Planet recycling technology," the cradle of humanity second, recreating a planet, recycling several earth, very grand, for example, the moon of Earth, Mars, Earth-based and so on. So, in the long term macro-economic value, the commercial value is simply astronomical, far beyond the initial investment in humans. A planet, how much the value of trillion dollars? ? ? Space race, moon, Mars is the natural choice for the planet. Huge investment, works hard, a lot of risk, consuming hundreds of years or even decades for thousands of years is possible. (This is a large program, not a small program, micro planned size of the scale of investment, the difficulty, there is a great difference time-consuming, must not be confused. Notice, Mars and safely to and from Mars base and construction of small and large-scale Mars Reconstruction is not the same thing, a small lunar base construction and large-scale transformation of the Moon is also not the same, there is a big difference between the two. Do not fish, to no avail, a big mistake.) So, feasible and reliable economic It is the most sensible choice. Planning for the planning, real return reality, are not mutually reversed. Despite the high risk and high investment, aerospace technology, space technology is inevitable in the face of mankind and significant challenges inescapable reality, I would like to take shortcuts, hype, is tantamount to nonsense. The bill does not automatically float down from the sky; humans are not in vain to the sky sprinkle money. We have lost income only, there is only the loss of income.

Mars moon // overall planning / cost: (A) a large transformation immigrant 150-300 trillion dollars (B) the transformation of immigrant 20-100 trillion dollars SMEs (C) miniature reconstruction small bases 1-10 trillion dollars (D) Mars / Moon base 100-1500 billion dollars

Inner planet large storage warehouse expansion project Planet Planet engineering works outside the expansion project X1 project x2 x3 project project project x5 x4 project (sub-project, subproject)

Planet Water Planet oxygen supply workstation workstation workstation planet living planet energy supply station planet plant cultivation stations planet solar, nuclear safeguards workstation workstation planet Biomedical
Contact Planet Planet culture communication station automated workstation planet shrouded planet automated workstation-based workstation planet moving spaceship repair and maintenance station




Mars moon // overall planning / cost: (A) large immigrant 150-300 trillion dollar renovation several hundred thousands of years of time span, costly, long-term goal, is not feasible at this stage (B) SME transformation immigration 70 -120 trillion dollar long-term goals into a huge (C) miniature reconstruction small bases 1-10 trillion dollars into smaller, less risky, technically feasible, 100--200 years feasible (D) Mars / Moon 100-1500 billion dollars base technology tend to improve gradually, little investment, greater reliability, feasibility, risk, the commercial value of the larger 100 years can be achieved. C / D program is far superior to A / B program, D solutions for preferred best, if C / D program integration, is also a good choice. First of all, great savings, technology maturity overall feasible. Commercial value among them.

Inner planet large storage warehouse expansion project Planet Planet engineering works outside the expansion project X1 project x2 x3 project project project x5 x4 project (sub-project, subproject)

Planet Water Planet oxygen supply workstation workstation workstation planet living planet energy supply station planet planet solar plant cultivation stations, nuclear power stations planet Mars telescope biomedical protect workstations
Contact Planet Planet culture communication station automated workstation planet shrouded planet automated workstation-based workstation planet moving spaceship space station repair and maintenance of high-performance cameras and so on. "Of course, this is a large transformation Mars / Moon reconstruction plan, the cost greatly; Junior Mars base / lunar base costs can be greatly reduced to hundreds of billions of dollars. Simply landing on Mars and return safely It is estimated that only about $ 100 billion, only the direct cost of ten billion US dollars needed to. Large research and development costs, hundreds of billions of dollars, while landing on Mars one way direct commercial costs about 10-20 million US dollars, two-way return direct commercial cost about 10-25 billion dollars. Overall R & D expenses and cost of spacecraft to Mars and from 7: hovering between 3. A conservative estimate, Mars and return safely to Earth, direct business costs are not more than ten billion US dollars. Mars immigrants, transforming Mars, the costs are much the size, the main distinction between plan size and scale, can not be generalized. Therefore, the above analysis, 100--200 years, C / D program is quite feasible, overhead costs will not be much; and A / B program cost too much, only after the goals and action. Simply build a lunar base and landed on Mars and a small safe return or the cost of the establishment of micro base on Mars is not much direct commercial cost is not too high, and larger profits and other commercial value.





----- Eye of God in human history's greatest pioneering history of the world's most brilliant picture, the natural splendor of the universe's greatest landscape ----- 30 most significant scientific universe's most cutting-edge technology research and development project (/ Heavy News No. // outside)
------------------------------- No big news outside / Heavy news
----- Eye of God in human history's greatest pioneering history of the world's most brilliant picture, the natural splendor of the universe's greatest landscape ----- 30 most significant scientific universe's most cutting-edge technology research and development projects // No big news outside / Heavy news





(1). Powerful more advanced speeding moon landing spaceship, and from the earth between the moon ---- only takes a few days. Or just need dozens of hours (2) the Moon itself to gradually transform the living environment of use. (3) Energy. Solar energy, super moon solar batteries, generators, and space solar energy storage unit and the like. (4) Water is a basic condition for human survival. Recycling water, chemical synthesis of water, on geology, geological exploration moon. High circulating water utilization system. (5) Life Moon base (6) ground lunar soil structure design, planting plants. (7) to IM-month high density contact system. (8) large moon work positions. (9) The development and utilization of the moon's poles, the moon mineral exploitation. (10). Moon biology, human biology established to carry out the moon, to ensure that human health, resist overcome the planet's syndrome and so on. (11) The rapid development of modern science and technology, many difficult and yet humans solve puzzles, survive and build the lunar base, build a lunar village needs robust technical support viable technical support. For example, in search of water, human biological reactions, development of ultra-fast spacecraft, lunar oxygen system, the depth of the lunar bear the brunt of exploitation, etc., placed in front of us. (12) The new space suit, moon live and work clothing research and other research method uses technology and so on. (13) air security system moon, lunar oxygen, while the most powerful and most important key to the forefront of cutting-edge technology is des...
== <tt>Heading text</tt> ==